In this paper I describe a ciphertext-only attack effective for short (about 300 letter) messages with keys including up to six plugs, and for longer messages using up to ten plugs. The underlying techniques were known at the time, but the necessary hardware may not have been available, since it requires accumulating (in effect) squares of frequencies for each of several thousand trial plaintexts. However, it would not have been surprising for the boffins of Bletchley to cobble together a device to do something similar: the actual processing for this attack requires fewer operations and less sophistication than the bombe attack, since it does not need to try multiple cribs.
I have a dream that one day every valley shall be exalted, and every hill and mountain shall be made low, the rough places will be made plain, and the crooked places will be made straight, and the glory of the Lord shall be revealed and all flesh shall see it together. This is our hope. This is the faith that I go back to the South with. With this faith we will be able to hew out of the mountain of despair a stone of hope. With this faith we will be able to transform the jangling discords of our nation into a beautiful symphony of brotherhood. With this faith we will be able to work together, to pray together, to struggle together, to go to jail together, to stand up for freedom together, knowing that we will be free one day.
If the first woman God ever made was strong enough to turn the world upside down all alone, these women together ought to be able to turn it back , and get it right side up again! And now they is asking to do it, the men better let them
With malice toward none, with charity for all, with firmness in the right as God gives us to see the right, let us strive on to finish the work we are in, to bind up the nation’s wounds, to care for him who shall have borne the battle and for his widow and his orphan, to do all which may achieve and cherish a just and lasting peace among ourselves and with all nations
So, first of all, let me assert my firm belief that the only thing we have to fear is…fear itself — nameless, unreasoning, unjustified terror which paralyzes needed efforts to convert retreat into advance. In every dark hour of our national life a leadership of frankness and of vigor has met with that understanding and support of the people themselves which is essential to victory. And I am convinced that you will again give that support to leadership in these critical days.
There are three things all wise men fear: the sea in storm, a night with no moon, and the anger of a gentle man.
It's like everyone tells a story about themselves inside their own head. Always. All the time. That story makes you what you are. We build ourselves out of that story.
You have to be a bit of a liar to tell a story the right way. 
